>> I'm William Henry, and
this is "Ascension Keepers."
We have established
that the Cathars
were keepers of ascension.
Like the Essenes, the
Cathars sought a return
to our Edenic state--
our primordial condition
before the fall.
Back then, we weren't
in a lesser state--
a physical state--
as some believe.
We were in a supra-human phase--
our light bodies.
These gnostics believe that Adam
and Eve were beings of light.
Then after the fall, we
were given coats of skin--
human skin.
And according to the ascension
keepers, all of human history
has been about transcending
the limitations of our flesh
and blood bodies and
returning, transforming
or ascending to our original
state of being as light beings.
The Cathars utilized
the ascension of Isaiah,
an early second to third century
AD gnostic Christian text
that follows the
journey of the prophet
Isaiah out of the
suffering of Earth life,
through the seven heavens,
to the throne of God,
where Isaiah gets
his robe of light.
Always, this robe
of light is present
in these essential stories.
Isaiah saw quote "Enoch, and
all who were with him, stripped
of their robes of the flesh.
And I saw them in
their robes above.
And they were like
the angels who
stand there in great glory."
This ascension text
would help the Cathars
to explain the consolamentum,
because the vision of Isaiah
describes the place
in the seventh heaven
for the righteous dead,
which would be all those who
had received the consolamentum.
The vision of
Isaiah made its way
into the oral tradition
of the Cathars.
At an interrogation by the
inquisition at Pamiers in 1321,
a witness testified that
a Cathar had told him
that another Cathar
had once wanted
to know whether he
was truly following
the good faith and the
right way of the Cathars.
As he prayed to
understand this, an angel
appeared and granted him
successive levels of vision,
exactly as described in
the vision of Isaiah.
The man discovered at
the end of the vision
that he had been
away for 32 years.
What does this mean?
Was this vision that he had
some kind of a time travel
experience, or did it
mean something else?
No one is quite sure, but
it's quite an enigmatic line.
We will explore how this text
was used as a visualization
tool to induce visions
of the afterlife
and to connect the Cathars
with their future selves--
their light body selves.
Through repeated chanting of the
text, the body of the Cathars
began to know what
it felt like to be
in heaven among the angels
and how to become them.
This is something the scenes
Essenes taught, as well.
And today, feeling
it to manifest it
is a principle of
quantum healing.
Before going deeper into
the vision of Isaiah,
I would like to connect the
dots between the Cathars
and the ascension teachings
of the divine feminine.
Earlier, we briefly touched
on the Cathar's Book of Love
and how it may be the same book
delivered by the rainbow angel
and revealed to the Cathars
during the consolamentum.
At Montsegur, we
learned the legend
of a book that has been guarded
and protected by the Cathars--
the pure ones.
A manuscript, which
lies in a leaden
casket in the
depths of a cavern.
This manuscript is
called the Book of Love.
Author Elizabeth Van Buren
tells us the Book of Love
is said to be the book given
to John the Divine by Jesus
and is said to contain
sublime teachings--
marvelous revelations,
the most secret words
confided by our Lord Jesus
Christ to the beloved disciple.
Their power would be
such that all hatred,
all anger, all jealousy would
vanish from the hearts of men.
The divine love,
like a new flood,
would submerge all souls,
and never again would blood
be shed on this earth.
This, of course, is the
goal of the Essenes, who
sought to transform Earth
into a planet of righteousness
and is the promise of the
rainbow body of light teaching.
Researchers claim the Book of
Love is written in symbols.
These symbols are the mystery
language of the Book of Love,
and they are preserved in
curious designs inserted
into paper in the
form of watermarks.
After their extermination by the
Catholic church, the Cathars--
those that survived--
became paper makers.
Scottish mythologist
Harold Bailey
called these designs thought
fossils or thought crystals,
in which lies the lost
teachings of the Book of Love.
These symbols only
became visible
when the paper was
held to the light.
Then, in a flash, came a signal
of hope and encouragement
to continue on
the path of souls.
Antonin Gadal, known as a
Cathar perfect one, or Parfait,
says the primary symbols
of the Book of Love
included the light ship of
Isis, the Egyptian goddess.
Now this is very interesting,
as the light ship of Isis
takes us to Egypt and the Ark
of the Millions of Years--
the ascension craft-- the
wormhole shaped ascension craft
that is the ship of the soul
of the ancient Egyptian gods.
Attached to this light
ship in this depiction
from the Temple of
Hathor at Dendera
is a pillar called
the Head of Osiris.
It is the ancient
Egyptian symbol
for the hope for the afterlife.
The hieroglyph for
the Head of Osiris
includes a serpent on a pole.
This, of course, is the healing
Nehushtan pillar of Moses
that enabled Moses
to make a seraphim
and was the symbol
that was banished
from the Temple of Solomon by
King Josiah during his purge.
It is the key symbol for the
divine feminine mysteries
and represents the
raising of Kundalini
in preparation for ascension.
This is the most
intriguing symbol
cataloged by Harold Bailey.
In this depiction--
this Cathar diagram--
for symbols form a device.
We see an ox head, a
pillar, and a serpent,
and three orbs, and a horn.
The ox is the symbol for the
Ark of the Covenant, which
was carried on an ox cart.
From the serpent's mouth emerges
three circles bound together.
This symbol is
called the trefoil.
It's the emblem of the Trinity.
Notably, it is the symbol
for the fifth element--
wood.
After earth, air,
fire, and water,
there is the fifth element--
wood-- also known as
quintessence, the Cintamoni,
and the Elixir of Light--
the Elixir of Immortality.
The word Christ means anointed
and comes from the Greek chrism
and creo, to anoint.
Thus we have a creo,
a horn or a vessel,
as part of this
collection of symbols.
Again, this is exactly
the same symbols
that were found in the Holy
of Holies of Solomon's temple
before the purge of
Josiah erased them.
This shows the Cathars were
in the line of transmission,
if you will, of
they who understood
this symbolism and the secrets
of ascension it encoded.
It tells me the Book of Love
is another term for the lost
ascension wisdom tradition.
So now, on to the
ascension of Isaiah.
This journey is ancient.
It begins with what is known
as Isaiah's call vision,
around 740 BC, when the Old
Testament prophet entered
the Holy of Holies of Solomon's
temple, the most sacred place
in Judaism, and saw
the Lord enthroned,
and heard him speak
amidst the seraphim,
and heard their voices
calling, holy, holy, holy.
He saw the Lord.
He heard the Lord and heard the
heavenly beings in the temple.
A seraph took a burning
coal from the incense altar
and purified Isaiah's lips.
Then Isaiah embarked
on a cosmic journey.
This cosmic journey
is the journey
that inspired the Essenes to
move out into the wilderness
and to expect the arrival--
as Isaiah described, the arrival
of a high celestial being.
Isaiah's ability to
enter the heavenly realms
showed that it's possible
to transcend worlds,
especially from
Solomon's temple.
All could enter this
realm by actively
following the path of Isaiah,
so the ascension keepers taught.
This may be one reason why
when the Church of Roma
came to burn the Cathars
during the Albigensian Crusade
and the inquisition.
The Cathars went
willingly into the fires.
They knew where they were going.
During his journey
in the second heaven,
Isaiah is so
overcome with what he
sees that he falls
on his face to adore
the angel on the throne.
But his angelic
guide warns him not
to adore the angel or the
throne of that heaven.
No.
Adore him only of whom I will
tell you and in like fashion,
adore him who is
above all angels,
above thrones, and above the
garments and crowns which
you will see hereafter.
Those garments and crowns
are the garments and crowns
sought by the Essenes.
Isaiah also saw a human
form on the throne.
Quote "In the year
that King Uzziah died,
I saw the Lord sitting upon
a throne high and lifted up.
And his train filled the temple.
Above him stood the seraphim."
This throne is the
Merkabah throne--
the celestial vehicle
of the higher beings,
the throne that
the Essenes sought.
Merkabah, or throne literature,
describes the beings
who dwell at the
heavenly throne room
in the celestial Holy of
Holies in the celestial temple.
The Hekhalot Zutarti
says quote "Their walking
is like the appearance
of a lightning bolt.
A vision of them is like
a vision of a rainbow.
Their faces are like
a vision of a bride.
Their wings are like the
radiance of the clouds of glory
on which God rode
in the heavens."
This means these seraphim are
rainbow body plasma beings.
And in my opinion, they are the
same as the beings described
in the Tibetan rainbow
light body tradition.
As Isaiah's vision continues--
his journey continues--
each succeeding heaven
is more glorious than
the previous one,
and Isaiah is filled with joy.
In the sixth heaven,
Isaiah is told that no one
has seen what he has seen.
And he is promised his
place in the seventh heaven
upon his death, when he
will receive his garment
and will be equal to the angels.
After seeing all
this, Isaiah doesn't
want to return to the
material world of darkness.
But his guide tells him that
the light of the seventh heaven
is far greater and that
it's not Isaiah's time yet
to take his place in
the seventh heaven.
In the seventh
heaven, though, Isaiah
sees certain of the righteous
who, stripped of fleshly robes,
were in heavenly robes and
standing in great glory.
These are their spiritual
bodies of light.
And the robes they
wear are the robes
of light sought by the Essenes,
the Cathars, and all ascension
keepers.
Isaiah has reached
Zion, which was thought
to lie at the
center of the world
and on top of Yahweh's
holy mountain,
Zion, whose base was rooted in
the depths of the underworld
and whose highest reaches--
the heights of
Zaphon, says Isaiah--
stretched into the
farthest heavens.
You have come to Zion, to
the heavenly Jerusalem,
the city of the living God,
says the book of Hebrews.
You have come to
thousands upon thousands
of angels in joyful assembly.
In Montsegur and the
Mystery of the Cathars,
Jean Markale notes that
another Cathar text, the Secret
of the Last Supper, claims that
the sixth and seventh heavens
were places where the light
retained and perpetuated
its integral integrity.
And the eyes of my
souls were opened,
and I beheld the great glory.
And its luster was dazzling
that I could no longer
see the angel who was with
me and all the angels I
had spied praising the Lord.
Markale says that this
short passage indicates
that the spiritual light
of the seventh heaven
was so exceptional that it
banished all other lights.
This is the elixir of
light we discussed earlier.
This is the light that
transformed Dante.
This is the light the Cathars
maintained they were beaming
into their castles in the sky.
The same ideas is expressed in
Percival by Chretien de Troyes,
specifically in the description
of the light emanating
from the Holy Grail.
As seen in this illumination
from the Lohengrin Grail Saga,
it was a light that eclipsed
that of the candles,
as well as the light of the Sun.
The idea to be grasped here is
that there exists somewhere,
symbolically, at
the highest point
in the heavens, a privileged
spot where the light is
of absolute purity.
This light can
not be apprehended
by human consciousness without
being transduced or transposed
into a palpable form.
Otto Rahn, the
German mythologist,
argued in 1933 that the
Cathar castle, Montsegur,
was Montsalvage and is
the castle of the Holy
Grail, the link to Zion.
We certainly can view
it as a gateway to Zion.
And in his book, Crusade
Against the Grail,
Rahn accepted that the Grail is
a metaphor for the human soul.
But he also tells how Wolfram
Von Eschenbach's epic Parzival,
which was contemporary
with the Cathars,
is the story of how the Grail
is a stone or a book that
fell from Lucifer's
crown to earth,
and that it landed on Montsegur.
Christ recovered this stone.
The Cathars considered
the keep of Montsegur
penetrated by the sun
on the summer solstice--
in other words, by
light in its purest,
freshest, and most
dazzling form--
as a representative
of the seventh heaven.
It is Eden in Dante's
Divine Comedy.
It is a Sun or star chamber--
a stargate to the
seventh heaven,
a place where the Cathars
could open a hole in heaven
and experience the
lost elixir of light
of the seventh heaven and
total ecstasy and happiness.
Montsegur, therefore,
was a place of ascension.
Scholars now recognize
that this Grail stone
is also called the
Cintamani, or wish fulfilling
gem, of the Buddhists.
It's symbolized by three circles
in the pattern of a pyramid.
This is exactly
what we saw being
spit from the mouth of the
serpent in the Cathar watermark
on the true cross, suggesting
that they may, in fact, have
possessed the Cintamani.
The Cintamani stone
is the cosmic stone
that dropped from heaven
in Tibetan Buddhism.
It is the symbol for the
power of resurrection
that instantly manifests
what ever thought we think.
It produces the
rainbow light body.
Leonardo da Vinci's
lost Christ Pantocrator,
or Savior of the world, shows
Jesus holding a crystal orb
with three dots in a triangle.
Is this a coincidence,
or is Leonardo
telling us something about
Jesus and the Cintamani stone?
Mani, the Persian prophet
we've been discussing,
took his name from
this grail stone--
from the Cintamani stone.
The intriguing, yet
very speculative
possibility that Padmasambava,
who brought the rainbow body
teaching from India to
Tibet in the eighth century,
provided the model
for Parzival himself
is discussed by scholars.
Linda Harris, author of the
Secret Heresy of Hieronymus
Bosch, has presented
a controversial theory
that key elements of the
Cathar ascension teaching
resurfaced in the early 16th
century, about 400 years
after their genocide
by the Church of Rome.
She provides evidence that
this enigmatic Flemish painter,
Hieronymus Bosch, inherited
the Cathar symbol code--
the Book of Love--
and concealed it within his
extraordinary, dreamlike, and
sometimes grotesque
paintings in an effort
to preserve and advance or
transmit Cathar teaching.
One of his most
well-known triptychs
is the Garden of Earthly
Delights, housed today
in the Prado in Madrid.
The strange and haunting
imagery woven throughout this--
and indeed, all
of Bosch's work--
creates a consistent and
symbolic visual language
unique to Bosch.
Unlike the punishing
Christian Purgatory,
the Cathar bridge world,
called the New Earth,
was viewed as a
garden of delight
where souls could
reorient themselves
to their original
perfection, bliss, and joy.
In his article, the Millennium
by Hieronymus Bosch,
John Rickman suggests
another explanation
is that the symbols are
mysterious precisely
because they were intended to
be inaccessible except, perhaps,
to a small audience of
initiates, such as the members
of a secret Hermetic society.
He says a group known as
the Hominis Intelligentsia,
or Brothers and Sisters
of the Free Spirit,
has been suggested
by some historians
as the possible patron
who commissioned
Bosch's most intriguing works.
This group obviously sounds
like keepers of ascension to me.
This group was part of a
heretical movement that
had spread throughout
Europe that
sought to combat the all
powerful Church of Rome.
This coalition of
free thinkers was
influenced by the Adamites, an
offshoot of the Carpocratian
Gnostics of the second century,
who called their church
Paradise and sought to
return humanity to Adam
and Eve's original state of
innocence and perfection.
This means they,
too, were devoted
to attaining the light body.
Lydia Harris points us to
one of Bosch's paintings
from the flood
roundel at Rotterdam.
In the background, we see a
saved soul-- a Cathar soul--
receiving his robe of
light-- or beaming garment,
as Mani called it--
from an angelic messenger.
Then this soul
kneels before Jesus,
who is portrayed
as a beam of light.
In Bosch's phenomenal
triptych called the Altarpiece
of the Hermits,
Saint Jerome kneels
before a traditional Catholic
image of the crucifixion.
We see the dead Jesus
attached to the dead wood.
But in the lower left, we see
a strange glassy cylinder.
Mani called this the Column of
Glory, or the Christ Column.
Inside is a rising or
ascending Cathar soul--
surely a being of
light ascending
past the Sun and Moon.
It's possible, says
Harris, that this painting
was inspired by
the Cathar version
of the Vision of Isaiah,
the apocalyptic book whose
text describes the prophet
Isaiah's visions of the seven
heavens.
This text, as we noted, was
used as a meditation tool
to induce visions of the
afterlife for the Cathars
and served as a sort of roadmap
or mind map for ascension.
It's possible that Bosch
himself may have experienced
this other worldly vision or
was given explicit descriptions
by initiates--
the keepers of ascension-- who
actually had this experience.
As described in the
vision of Isaiah,
Bosch's painting
shows the heavens
are layered one upon another.
And as we see in the detail, the
column in Bosch's Saint Jerome
is divided into four layers that
rest upon a semi circular pink
base.
This represents
the earthly world.
The pink bass is
then met by a seal
of spiky entwined branches that
resemble the crown of thorns.
This represents the border
between Earth and Heaven.
And as the perfected
one, or Cathar soul,
rises above this seal,
it infers that this
is a perfected human who has
transcended the entanglements
of material Earth life.
Above the crown of thorns,
the freed soul ascends
to a dark layer
filled with stars--
a stargate.
This then leads to a blue
band, which could be Heaven.
But above that is
another layer--
a layer of stars, a
crescent Moon, a bright
and a radiant Sun.
This is spiritual Zion
that produces this light
beyond light.
As Lydia Harris writes,
this is metaphorically
the shining head of Jesus.
It is the soul's final goal--
a kind of portal which
leads to the land of light.
Harris notes that the
Cathars identified Jesus
with the Tree of Life--
the tree or column
which reaches to Heaven,
or the land of light, Zion.
Further she says, the
Cathars and the Manichaeans
envision this as
a real channel--
an actual stargate through
which the saved souls freely
traveled.
I envision the Ark
of the Covenant
as the ancient divine feminine
tool that opened this channel.
Jesus is equated with
this column or pillar
in Coptic Manichaean psalms.
In the Cathar work called
The Manichaean Treatise,
we are told that the tree
of life and its fruits
are found in the New Earth.
It also alludes to Jesus
as the Tree of Knowledge
and the Column of Glory.
The spiritual sun of the new
Earth, Zion, never sets there.
The Column of Glory,
or Christ Column,
of the Cathars and
Manichaeans is also
represented in one of the most
haunting paintings ever known.
It's usually called
Ascent to the Imperium
and is the fourth of the
Afterlife Panels by Hieronymus
Bosch in the Palazzo
Ducale in Venice
and presents a visionary
scene of human souls ascending
towards a tunnel--
a portal leading to a
glowing heavenly paradise.
The depiction of
an awaiting world
of light accessed
through a tunnel of light
is consistent with
the testimonies
of people who have experienced
the near-death experience
and returned from the
threshold of death.
In this extraordinary
painting, we
see a number of souls ascending
to a stargate composed
of concentric rings
suspended above the clouds.
As the soul rises, it appears
to become less and less dense,
until it dissolves into a
radiant being of light once
inside the tunnel.
Waiting is a solitary figure--
the Light Twin, the
Messenger, Dante's Beatrice,
the Lady of Light.
This illustrates the Cathar
and Manichaean belief
that the saved--
the perfected ones, those who
are whole, wholly complete,
and perfected-- would regain
their original immaterial light
bodies before ascending to
the land of light, or Zion.
And as Linda Harris observes,
quote "The unearthly light
at the end of Bosch's tunnel
is a place totally removed
from everything to do
with the physical world."
And what we have
seen in this episode
is that the Cathars were
clearly using stargate imagery.
They were utilizing
the vision of Isaiah
as a mind map that would
enable them to rehearse their
after life experience.
By rehearsing this over,
and over, and over again
in their earthly minds, they
then created a material reality
in their afterlife mind.
We've all heard of this
quantum healing concept--
feel it in order to manifest it.
And this is what the
vision of Isaiah was.
And what this scholarship shows
is that the Cathars clearly
were tapping into the light
body teachings of the Tibetans,
of the Manichaeans, of
the early Christians,
and were ready and
willing to transform
their bodies into light as they
scaled this ladder to heaven.
And isn't it absolutely
incredible and intriguing
that Hieronymus
Bosch may well have
been the recipient of
these Cathar teachings,
if he didn't experience
them himself,
and has encoded them
within his paintings
for us to use as
navigational or meditation
tools in our own
journey to ascension.
So this means that
Hieronymus Bosch is another
of our ascension keepers.